Israel has rejected an order from the
international court of justice in the ha
to immediately stop its military
offensive in the southern gazen city of
Rafa the court described the
humanitarian situation there as
disastrous but stopped short of ordering
a full ceasefire Israel insists its
operations inside Gaza is in line with
international
law far from the front lines of the war
in Gaza Israel's military campaign
suffered a major legal
blow Israel must immediately hold its
military offense and any other action in
the Rafa Governor which may inflict on
the Palestinian group in Gaza conditions
of life that could bring about its
physical destruction in whole or in part
the latest icj ruling unequivocal about
the need for Israel to protect
Palestinians and do more to provide
vital Aid the decision welcomed by South
Africa which brought the case and has
accused Israel of committing genocide
this order is groundbreaking as it is
the first time that explicit mention is
made for Israel to Halt its military
action in any area of Gaza this time
specifically in
Rafa Israel rejects accusations of
genocide and the latest icj ruling War
cabinet minister Benny gun said the
fight to return its hostages would
continue including in Rafa the icj also
ordered the unconditional release of
hostages being held by
Hamas while the court has no way of
enforcing the ruling it poses a major
challenge for Israel's
allies we have to choose between our
support of international institution and
the rule of law or our support to Israel
and both things is going to be quite
difficult to make
comp the ruling is the Second Judicial
blow to Israel this week the
international criminal court has applied
for arrest warrants for Israel's prime
minister and defense minister over
alleged war crimes both decisions adding
to Global criticism of Israel's
war DW correspondent Rebecca ritters
joins us now from Jerusalem uh again
Rebecca the Israeli government has been
ordered to stop any sign it
will well it's certainly been quite a
week Michael um I think the answer to
that question the short answer is no
that's certainly not what we're seeing
on the ground in a foreign Ministry
statement after that ruling was handed
down uh we we the statement said Israel
has has not and will not conduct
military actions in Rafa which may
inflict on Palestinian population
conditions that could bring about
physical destruction so in almost denial
of the accusations there coming from the
court or from the rulings there prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu also
rejected the allegations of genocide
saying these things are simply
outrageous we heard from the opposition
y Leed also condemning uh this ruling
from the icj so really across the board
uh Benny gun the cist Benny gun who is a
member of that war cabinet was more as
you heard in that report actually was
more uh even clear about the actions he
said that that Israel would continue its
just and necessary War to bring home its
hostages betel smotrich the Finance
Minister on the far right of Benjamin
netanyahu's Coalition called the court
anti-semitic so this is some of the the
sentiment that we're hearing from Israel
and certainly uh looks on the ground
what we're hearing is that the fighting
continues tanks continue to push in to
rougher and eyewitnesses speak of uh
huge bombardments and smoke rising over
the area what's the reaction been from
the Israeli public to the
ruling well that all depends on who
you're talking to a large portion of the
Israeli public agree with much of the
sentiment that we've been hearing across
the board from the government they think
it is unjust they think the world is
against uh Israel and they feel you know
the war is still relatively or more than
relatively it is still largely popular
here people do believe that it is the
only way that they can get back the
hostage
a large proportion of society I should
say believe that they also believe that
the Hamas threat needs to be eliminated
so uh certainly you know large portions
of Israeli Society standing with that
sort of Israeli government and Israeli
opposition uh position that the icj
ruling is unjust though of course there
are members within Israeli Society
saying that yeah this is absolutely
outrageous and things should stop so you
really have an opinion across the board
but the majority is still standing on
the side of the wall Rebecca as you well
know eight agencies are warning of dire
consequences for Palestinians in Gaza if
the Rafa border crossing isn't reopened
has there been any progress
there well not so much with Rafa but
there has been some other limited
progress Rafa Crossing as we know has
been closed since this incursion began
now the Israelis say that they would be
willing to maintain that it's open but
the it's in fact the Egyptian side that
don't want to as they say be complicit
with um the incursion or with the
control of rougher Crossing with the
Israeli control of it so they have
maintained its closure but there's
they've struck a deal with the US just
last night uh President Biden of the US
spoke to president Cissy of Egypt and
they uh coordinated and agreed that aid
from Egypt that has been sitting at that
raer Crossing you know some of it
rotting waiting to cross over and also
fuel Rafa is the only Crossing where
fuel is able to cross now it will be
diverted to that Kum shalom Crossing and
some Aid will start to be able to go
through there we've seen very limited
amounts of Aid going through since the
incursion began and we know that some
600 trucks a day are needed to avert the
humanitarian catastrophe that's
unfolding there our Rebecca ritters in
Jerusalem thanks
Rebecca and now we turn to Yanina Dill
who is Professor of Global Security at
the University of Oxford and joins us
from Berlin she specializes on the role
of Law and morality in international
relations specifically in war welcome
Yanina can you distill this for our
viewers the icj the un's top court has
ordered Israel to stop its military
operations in Rafa and yet it has no
power to enforce the ruling so what are
the implications for
Israel this is really a remarkable step
in the kind of Genesis of this case
because from the start really South
Africa argued that in order to protect
the Palestinians protect their rights
under the genocide convention the court
to interfere in how Israel conducts this
military operation order a ceasefire and
the court rejected this up until now it
is very important to note that the court
didn't actually order a ceasefire it
also didn't order Israel to Halt all its
military operations in Rafa but it very
very clearly characterized the current
military offensive that Israel is
conducting there as posing a risk of
group destruction to the Palestinian
people and for that reason it needs to
be halted the court is is quite clear on
that matter
and that's a quite direct interference
in how Israel conducts this war and it's
also a much more direct link that the
court establishes between how Israel
conducts this war and the risk of
genocide um and the rights of the
Palestinian people to be protected from
it explain to us how the judges might
have arrived at this
decision so this is the third time they
ordered provisional measures and
formally speaking they need to diagnose
a change in the situation on the ground
to order additional measures and this
time the Rafa offensive loomed really
large um last time it was really the
humanitarian situation the looming
famine which gets mentioned again this
time but it is really the Rafa offensive
that led the judges to the decision to
order additional measures and
specifically they say they're not they
were not convinced by Israel's
submission which argued that Israel
could protect the civilian population in
Rafa in line with its obligation under
international law and conduct this
offensive operation there instead the
court says amplifies the evidence of um
un experts and un bodies and really
almost any neutral Observer who has over
the last weeks raised the alarm
basically saying that it's incompatible
this offensive operation with the basic
protection of the civilian population
and as you mentioned the court says it's
exceptionally grave it calls the
situation
disastrous as you may well know it was
reported that uh Israeli bombs fell on
the Gaza Strip just this morning
including Rafa com Common Sense might
suggest that tells us all we need to
know about how Israel will react what
does it tell you and is the ruling
likely to change anything going
forward so we have um come to expect the
reactions from the Netanyahu government
right there's always a mixture of
Bluster um in terms of like the court
can't tell us what to do but also
there's always an attempt to spin these
orders and this time the attempt was to
say well the court actually didn't tell
us to Halt our military offensive it
just said that any military offensive
that in principle poses a risk of group
destruction to Palestinians would have
to be halted now this is not a plausible
reading or interpretation of this court
order but I do take some heart from this
attempt to spin the order because it
does suggest that Israel understands
that this order has weight compliance
doesn't really depend on anything
happening in Israel right now it really
only depends primarily or only on how
Western allies of Israel react to it
particularly the United States um I only
see a chance that this or um order will
make a difference for how Israel
conducts the war if the Biden
Administration Gets behind it and
conditions any further support on
compliance that is Yanina Dill professor
at the University of Oxford and an
expert on war and morality we thank you
for your time and
perspective thank you